yo it up I sometimes make pretty long
videos reflecting on shallow issues
shallow but sometimes you know pragmatic
interesting or useful for people's lives
in some other way this is going to be a
pretty short video about a reasonably
profound question one of the most
requested videos topics for me to make a
video boat has been for me to speak more
about nihilism and what nihilism means
to me I find it very easy to talk about
nihilism with people face to face when I
know them and they know me even if
they're people who know me in a shallow
way talking about philosophy in a
context like this one is difficult
because people have very different ideas
of what philosophy is or why we're
talking about it I think that most
people have the mistaken assumption that
the only reason for our philosophy to
exist is for me to try to convert other
people to that philosophy in the same
sense that some religions not all want
to convert everyone to believe in them
and in a sense that religion only exists
in order to convince other people of its
of its value that is not why I have a
philosophy and I think that is not a
legitimate reason for why philosophy
exists as a field of study or why anyone
would individually study philosophy or
have a philosophy personally certainly
the concept of having a philosophy is
worth reflecting on is worth thinking
about at some length from my perspective
a philosophy is a problem-solving method
like Karl Popper I view philosophy as
instrumental in this sense as a way of
understanding things for me nihilism is
a very positive doctrine and I use the
term historical nihilism which I in
effect have reinvented I haven't
invented the term but I've reinvented it
to refer to the form of nihilism I
myself practice
by contrast atheism is just a statement
that God does not exist or gods plural
don't exist it's negative particular
belief nihilism is an approach to
knowing the world that begins from the
profound assumption that there is
nothing to be believed in so stepping
away from God you can talk about
something like beauty or goodness virtue
I do not look at the world as if beauty
is something that exists out there for
me to understand for me to discover as
something that's imposed on me by
society or just by what I see I think of
the world more in terms of a blank
canvas on to which I have to paint onto
which I have to project onto which I
have to assert my ideas and in this
sense something like beauty I'm not
merely saying that it's in the eye of
the beholder I'm saying that in a
radical sense it's something shifting
and unreliable that I is the observer
and really involved in creating as an
artist what is good and what is evil a
very crude religious view of the world
would suggest that these are ideas that
exist before we're born that exists in
the same sense as a rock exists on the
side of the road as something we
discover we see we apprehend that we
have to learn about that we have to
follow that we may be right or wrong
about you may see the rock by the side
of the road or you may fail to see it
you may trip over it but that good and
evil beauty and ugliness are things that
simply exist out there independent of
ourselves and the form of nihilism
epistemologically that I'm talking about
is at the opposite extreme from that
perspective and that does not mean that
good and evil are of no importance
on this channel I moralize a great deal
I talk about good and evil and ethics
and morality but I am very conscious of
my role again a step beyond merely
saying beauty is in the eye of the
beholder I am aware of my role in
creating and distorting and recreating
these things and that to a very large
extent in terms of the realm of values
in terms of the realms of the realm of
what most people think of as beliefs I'm
really sitting in front of a blank
canvas I'm really encountering things
that I myself have created although many
people i think mistakenly believe that
these are not human created values
perhaps because they were taught them by
their grandparents perhaps because of a
particular religious conviction or
perhaps you know just out of laziness
you can live your whole life without
ever questioning what's beautiful and
what's ugly what's good and what's evil
what's delicious and what's revolting so
that is this kind of simple
epistemological and ethical side of it
of nihilism as a challenge to values and
how we think about values no values
matter and it doesn't mean that
everyone's values are equal not at all
this is an analysis this is a way of
thinking about reality and you know
among other things this recognizes why
one man consider something beautiful
that another doesn't why one man
consider something good that another man
considers evil and it's an analysis
that's compatible with the cacophony of
the society we all live in it explains
reality it comprehends reality it lets
us live with reality it does not set
down a standard for how reality ought to
be it explicate seeeeee how reality
actually is and again that's why this is
philosophy not religion not dogmatism
this is philosophy as a problem-solving
method in the tradition of karl popper
now the term historical nihilism the
term I've chosen ivory appropriated
reinvented that is the term used by the
government of China today the communist
government of China in 2016 to describe
the opposite of their official doctrine
or belief as something it's it's illegal
it's bandits it's the view they do not
want people to believe in and that is
very telling because the government of
China wants people to believe in history
to have a faith in history a kind of
religion of history and history matters
to me enormously the same way I've just
said ethics good and evil matter
enormously but again I regard history as
that kind of blank canvas where and
again it's not a passive view of the
world as an artist as an intellectual as
a researcher it is up to me to do the
research to do the understanding to
manifest or create those meanings out of
history to find the morals if you like
in history to to not just learn the
lessons of history it's like passive
that already exists but in a sense you
have to you have to write the lessons of
history for yourself and then learn them
it's just a much more active model of
how these things work but in the same
sense that I think there is nothing to
be believed in in a God in beauty and
good or evil there is nothing to be
believed in in history so it's looking
at history with a profound awareness
that individuals make arbitrary
decisions that have terrible
consequences for people all over the
world that history doesn't follow a
divine plan there's no fate it's not the
will of God but that also it doesn't
follow the kind of semi-divine plan that
the Communist Party of China bleezin
because communism in China is an atheist
set of beliefs but they nevertheless
think that history has a kind of magical
quality to it that history is
navigable that it follows a plan that's
a sequence of stages rational originally
by Hagel he's supposed to be the mind of
God unfolding but so-called material
dialectics they have this very peculiar
philosophy of history that it almost
like a religion and they want the people
trying to believe in history so that for
example they believe when millions of
people were killed in political violence
that that was necessary and that that
was a stage in the development of
history and that the next stage is
better and better and so you can't
simply lament as a tragedy or regret
that one person who have to be in
political power made terrible decisions
with terrible consequences so historical
nihilism in choosing that term I'm
putting focus on those sort of political
and social aspects especially relevant
to China and history of Asia obviously
relevant to the history of Europe also
so the point is here to another way to
say this talk about the blank canvas of
the artist history doesn't make sense
history doesn't have meaning we can make
sense out of it as intellectuals we can
find meaning in it we can ascribe
meaning to it you know again projecting
meaning not discovering it as something
existing like a rock by the side of the
road there are other historical moments
when nihilism became an important idea
in history of Russia nihilism was a
contrast to communism it was a different
way for people to care about the poor
that didn't involve killing the rich
which is important and worth remembering
there is a famous novel by Turgenev a
novel called fathers and sons it's a
very enjoyable novel and nihilism as a
major theme in it and for many people in
the world that woke them up to the idea
of nihilism the nihilists in Russia had
a phrase that one of their catchphrases
politically was go to the poor be the
poor so this was advice for rich people
won't be I said don't march in the
streets don't think of yourselves and
the crazy way the communists do you want
to help the poor go to the poor
the poor and for me as a young man that
spoke to me in contrast to many of the
crazy ideas around me and to some extent
it's had practice in my life when I went
to a country like Laos I was not living
like a low farmer I was not really
living like a local poor person but
still there has been an important
especially going going to the poor being
the poor whoever the people where I was
studying other people's trying to help
of going and living with them and among
them and understanding things from their
perspective so that has been a part of
my life and that that it's part of the
flavor of nihilism my life but I do not
identify as a Russian nihilist I do not
have connections with any of the
specific Russian etiology I recognize
that's part of the history of the word
and aesthetically it's part of what
people associate with nihilism and there
was one other philosopher called Max
Turner Max Turner was very poorly
translated into English if you can't
read German and you haven't done a lot
of historical research is basically
incomprehensible in english today you
have to know so much about the melia to
read him but sterner also was a really
interesting moment in the history of
philosophy and he directly influenced
Karl Marx and he directly influenced
many many people directly everyone's
Nietzsche and others now sterner I
actually do not agree with profoundly
again like rushing out he's not doesn't
really have anything to do with my my
version of nihilism but again his
philosophy in the debate surrounding his
philosophy or another moment in history
when nihilism seemed to become important
and people thought about the meaning of
the word okay so I think that's enough
to say in this video really the deeper
questions people ask is what is the
meaning of of philosophy and what is the
point of having a philosophy in your
life with some people I have known again
in clean people I knew and it kind of
shell away there have been times when I
talk to them about like peace and war
and they were really surprised at
pragmatic and useful what I was saying
was how different it was from all the
political things they've heard left
winger right right wing and they've
asked me well what is my political
philosophy and then I start talking
about nihilism and it actually does have
a really positive message
in application a piece of North politics
and they actually give really inspired
what have you so I mean I think that's
that's an incongruous thing nihilism I
would not call it empowering I think for
many people if you grown up in a world
of fixed values of received beliefs and
assumptions it feels liberating but it
also puts more responsibility on you
it's really saying you are not the
observer you are the artist in relation
to the world of values and so much of
what we debate in this world does
consist of values good evil beautiful
ugly and you know ethical issues
underlying peace and war and hard
decisions we make of course nihilism is
not like classical skepticism in that
sense because it's not questioning
whether or not the number six is really
different from the number seven it's not
about that kind of technical challenge
that many academics spend a lot of their
time debating all right um I think
that's enough for now uh for those of
you who were interested because i did
get many emails asking me to talk about
the meaning of the word nihilism for me
um I get to press the stop button at
under 15 minutes I hope you take
something away from it